He said that you're alienating them? Yeah, he
said, you people are alienating a lot of whites in
this area. And I asked him why, and he said, well,
because you're being too pushy to further the
cause of these Hispanics attending college and
all that. And then when I told him that the majority
of these recipients were Anglos, not Hispanics,
He was very surprised to know this. He thought that
we existed only for the benefit and the
enhancement of the Hispanic culture. That's not
so. Then did he donate something? Then he said, I'm
going to give you a donation out of my pocket. Ten
dollars. He said, well I cannot be present at your
dance. As you know, or you probably don't know,
because the Black and White Ball Association is an
organization that never has sought publicity. It
works in a very low key profile. And last year,
their annual dance is held in February. And the
Bolo Brazos, now defeated, and his candidacy for
re-election was a guest of honor. The year before
then, Phil Grand was our guest of honor. And both
last year and the year before then, President
Miller has attended on both occasions.
How many do you usually have turn on at the dance?
in the vicinity of 250, something like that. I
neglected to tell you the
most productive source of income, and that is the
Ugly King contest. Oh yeah, I was reading about
that. See, the Black and White Ball Association
invites certain prominent members of the
community to be candidates for ugly king with the
idea that the one who collects the most votes will
become king and be crowned king at the dance. Well,
each vote counts, each vote costs one penny. And
1978, a
local practitioner local physician here by the
name of Shipman was crowned king. He collected by
himself sixteen hundred dollars. Commissioner
Cooley who was county commissioner for precinct
one and I and uh and Andy Herrera were all uh
candidates and uh Andy and his followers
contributed about twelve hundred dollars to his
campaign and see all of that goes for the payment of
for for the award of scholarship there isn't a
single penny out of that ugly king contest that is
spent for anything else so you see all told now see
uh Dr. Shipman collected sixteen hundred and Andy
about $1,200, and Bill Cooley and I brought in
about seven or eight hundred dollars apiece. And
so that was a very significant sum of money, all of
which was used for scholarships. I have a
question. it deals with early period of your life
when when you left and went into the Marine Corps
why did you decide to come back to A&M if you felt you
were being discriminated against? I think it's
the best school in the country.
There are a lot of other schools that you could have
gone to. And another thing is I'm a resident of
Texas. It has the only College of Veterinary
Medicine in it. You know, it made no sense for me to
try and get a degree in veterinary medicine
outside of my state. So all of the reasons
were very prominent in my decision. How could you
tell me about your military career? Sure. I was
commissioned in the ROTC here in 1951. And then I
was called to active duty in 1952, only a few months
after I had graduated.
This is before you went on to California? No. I went
to California to practice with Dr. Tully there in
North Hollywood, California. I still have my
California license, as you can see up there. And I
was called to active duty in November of 1952. So
just a few months after you were out in California?
Yeah, I had just gotten out of school in May. You
see, I thought that it was a mistake, you know, that
I shouldn't be called because I had already served
in World War II. And at that time, 1952, they were
calling people for the Korean emergency. who had
never served before. And I think the top
priorities was, the top priority was the people
who had been in the A.H.D.P. program, had had their
education paid for, and had never returned Uncle
Sam the favor. You see? But, I was, I was recalled to
active duty anyway, and I went. And when I reached
The meat and dairy hygiene school in Chicago, I was
the only veteran in the class. All the rest of them
were ASTP boys. They'd never seen one day's active
duty, you see. They were all veterinarians, of
course. We were all veterinarians. Were you
called into the Army or the Marines? No, the Army.
The Marines never did have any veterinarians. I
was called into the Army. I was commissioned here
in the Army, and so they said, We need you for this
emergency." And I'm going to tell you my opinion.
When I got to Chicago, they said, well, we don't
understand here why you should have been called. I
said, I've been complaining about this for the
last three months. I told them I was a veteran,
served two years in the Marines, served abroad.
They said, well, this is obviously a mistake
because none of these other guys is a veteran. But
nonetheless, I went through a meeting there at
Hygiene School, was assigned to Fort Sam, and I was
so anxious to get out of the Army, to return to my
practice of veterinary medicine, that the first
day that I became eligible to get out, I did. I got
out after serving only 15 months. And I went back
into practice, and this time I practiced in El
Paso. Why didn't you go back to California?
I didn't go back to California because the job that
I left there had already been filled by somebody
else. I got out in February, which is a very poor
month, to try and get a job with an older
practitioner. And that same job that I left was
out. I couldn't return to it. But I began to
correspond with an older gentleman who lived in
Chino, and he gave me the opportunity to become a
50% partner in California. And I was considering
very seriously going to work for him, but I was
offered a job in El Paso by a practitioner for whom I
had worked as a student during my sophomore and
junior years, and during my junior and senior
year. And he offered me a contract, which I
accepted, and I went to work there instead. Well,
it turned out that he had set up a probationary
period of six months. And when five months were up,
I asked him, let's sign the contract, you know. And
he said, well, I've been to my lawyers, and my
lawyers tell me that I offered you too much in that
original contract. Here is an alternate
contract." And I said, I don't even want to look at
it, because you and I agreed that you were going to
give me this contract, and I will accept nothing
else. He said, well, I'm sorry, I can't give you
that. And I said, well, in that case, I won't. I feel
then that you have broken your word, and I feel no
moral obligation or commitment to you. And so, Uh,
it was during this interval that I received a call
from the dean of the College of Veterinary
Medicine here by the name of Armstead. And he said,
uh, would you like to come and teach here? Really?
Yeah. Had you been corresponding with him? No, no,
no, but you see I had been an outstanding student
here. He was my teacher. Oh, really? And so he
called me and said... How did he even know where you
lived? Former student's directory or something?
No, he knew where I was because we had
corresponded. I never asked him for a job, but out
of the clear blue sky, I get this call from Armstead
and he said, I've got a job open. I've got an opening
in the small animal clinic here. Would you
consider an institutional career, an academic
career? And I told him I'd never considered an
academic career. He said, well, I'll give you a
week to think about it. I'll pay you more than
you're getting now and give you a chance to work on a
master's. And before the week was up, I made up my
mind to come to A&M as a teacher. I came here in 1954.
1954.
And I began to teach here, and in 1957, I got the
Outstanding Teacher Award from the College of
Veterinary Medicine. I published more papers
than anybody else in my department did.
I was very happy here, teaching the small animal
clinic, but during the five years that I stayed
here, I never got a single raise. From 54 to 57? From
54 to 59. Oh, okay, okay. See? During those five
years. Why not? You answer the question. I don't
know why not. I mean, what else does a man have to do
to demonstrate his competency? There have been
people here teaching for 30 years who have never
gotten that award, and I got it in three.
Plus you had a number of publications. I was the one
that published the most. And in my own department,
see, at that time the small animal clinic and the
large animal clinic were in the Department of
Veterinary Medicine and Surgery. I was the only
one in my department who had an advanced degree in
my specialty. I got that degree. You got your
master's degree. I got a master's degree in
veterinary medicine and surgery when not even the
head of my department had a master's degree in
veterinary medicine and surgery. There were two
other people in that department who had master's
degrees, but they were not in veterinary medicine
and surgery. One of them in microbiology and one in
anatomy. I
didn't know how else I could demonstrate. And you
never got a raise for five years? I didn't get a
single raise. I was still an instructor at the end
of five years. The same rank that I had obtained
when I came here. My pay— Did he take this to the
dean? Oh, yeah. Yeah. What did he say? Well, he
said, if you promise to stay here another year,
you'll be number one on the list for promotion. And
I thought, well, I wasn't going to stick around
here. So I made an application. How much were you
being paid? You were going to say that. $6,492.
That was my total pay. $6,492. That was the highest
pay that I attained at A&M during those five years.
That's what it was when you started and that's what
it was when you ended. Well, when I started, except
for the periodic cost of living increase. Oh, so
they gave you a cost of living increase. Yeah. But
they never gave you a promotion. They never gave me
a promotion or they never gave me any... any
increase in pay due
to
demonstrated achievements or competence. No
merit raising? No merit raising. Were other
colleagues of yours getting merit raises? Oh
yeah, sure.
As a matter of fact, we were hiring people that were
working for me that were getting more money than I
was. You know, at that time, there were two
clinicians in the small animal clinic. That was
Dr. Beamer and myself, and we hired a guy from
Cornell who stayed here only a few months and left,
and then we hired a fellow who was working on a
master's here, and he was making more money than I.
Then he left, and then we hired Dr. Ellett. who was
the one that ascended to the directorship of the
Small Animal Clinic after Beamer died and after I
had left.
But I applied for active duty with the Army on two
conditions. Oh, in 1959 then? 1959. Okay, so by
1959 you were... Oh yeah, I was discouraged.
And during that interval you had received a
master's degree from A&M? Yes. Okay, and then in
1959 you decided to apply for active duty in the
Army again. That's right. Okay, and you tell me
about that. And what were those conditions? Those
conditions were, number one, that I be sent to the
Armed Forces Institute of Pathology. to be
trained as a pathologist. And number two, that I be
promoted to captain immediately. I was the first
lieutenant in the reserves. And those two
conditions were met by the Army. They called me out
of civilian life
to go fill a job, a job for which I had to compete with
people who were on active duty. They yanked me out
of civilian life and put me in Washington at the
Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, and they
began to train me as a pathologist. And they sent me
to Japan, where I was the chief of the Department of
Veterinary Laboratory Medicine over there. And
how long were you there in Japan? I was three years.
Both of my kids were born in Japan. There they are.
Then I was sent to Fort Knox. And then from Fort
Knox, I was sent to Michigan State University to
get my PhD. The Army sent you? The Army sent me. And I
graduated first in my class. And when was that? In
1968, I got my PhD. Why did they send you for
advanced training? Because I applied for it. A
circular was sent out to all the veterinary
detachments and offering this opportunity for
some officer to get a PhD in veterinary pathology.
That was the first instance in which they had made
this offer in veterinary pathology. So I jumped on
it and I was a candidate and they considered my
qualification and I was the one selected.
What a great opportunity. You must have froze up
there. Oh my God, it was cold in Michigan. But my
wife is from there and she was close to her folks. Is
that where you met your wife? No, you must have met
your wife long before that. No, I met my wife in
Washington, D.C. I met her while I was attending
the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology as a
trainee.
I graduated from Michigan State with a PhD in 1968.
In that same year, I became a board-certified
pathologist, you see. There's only about 400 of us
in the world. And then following that, I went to
Fort Detrick, where I was chief of pathology
there, and then chief of pathology at the medical
research laboratory in Fitzsimmons. And in due
time, I made my regular promotions. And finally,
in 1973, I was promoted to full colonel. At that
time, the United States Department of
Agriculture sent a request to the Surgeon General
to have a veterinarian assigned to them to develop
a national plan by which this country could deploy
military resources to the control of a foreign
animal disease that might have gained
introduction into this country. And so I worked up
this national plan, and it became an Army
regulation.
And for this, I was given that award. The USDA gave
me that award.
Oh, wow. How nice. 1976, and then did you resign
after that? Well, I retired. Oh, you retired in the
Army? Yeah. So then you had how many years in? At
that time I was credited with 28 years of military
service. I also was given an A prefix in pathology
by the Surgeon General, which means that you have
attained the highest competence in your field.
Really? There's that letter in 1975. and I got the
Legion of Merit and a Certificate of Achievement
from the Surgeon General for the work that I did in
pathology. Well, after that, why did you ever
decide to come back here? Well, in 1974,
when I was still on active duty, this university
was looking for somebody to head up an Institute of
Tropical Veterinary Medicine. which had been
established in 1966 and supported entirely by
federal funds and whatever contracts
could be generated by this institute. And because
of my experience in foreign animal disease
control and the fact that I had traveled abroad
they offered me this job. Dean Shelton offered me a
job. And
I thought that I had always wanted to return to
Texas, but I wanted to be in pathology in the
specialty which brings me the greatest pleasure,
and that is the study and control of foreign animal
diseases. And so this was a beautiful opportunity
to take over this institute, but when I arrived
here and we agreed what the salary would be and all
that, I was given a partial appointment in this
department here because I am a pathologist. So you
had a joint appointment then? Yes. One as
director? Director of the institute and a full
professor of pathology. I see. So I accepted the
job only to find out after I arrived here that there
was not going to be a nickel support from the state
of Texas. From the directorship? From the support
of the activities of the Institute. Oh, okay, for
the Institute? Yeah, for the Institute. So that
had to be funded totally by federal monies? By
federal monies and also whatever contracts we
were able to generate from pharmaceutical
companies or etc. And that displeased me very
much. Or grants. Yes. Or, you know, somebody that
might want to make a philanthropic organization
to, donation to. That displeased me very much and I
began to try and convince the people here that the
Institute could not possibly exist unless it was
supported by the state of Texas. Because the
golden age during which the Agency for
International Development was awarding monies
right and left was over. And so I felt that the core
support should come from the state of Texas. That
is to say, the payment of salaries to my
professionals, and to my technicians and to
support the research that we were doing, see. And
wherever I went I hit a stone wall, see, and no one
supported us with one nickel during thirteen
years that the institute was in existence.
We were able to establish for the university three
laboratories One in Falcon Heights. It's an
air-conditioned building paid for by federal
funds. One that is on the third floor of this
building. It's an arthropod tissue culture lab
that the institute, under my direction,
instituted. And the third one was a
histopathology laboratory, again without any
state support. installed and still in existence.
All three of these are going businesses. Well in
1979 my disenchantment was complete and I
resigned as director of the Institute and the
Institute of Tropical Veterinary Medicine has
since become defunct. Really? With three labs?
Yes. Now what do those labs do? There has been
another,
you might say, agency of the College of Veterinary
Medicine created, which they call the Center for
Tropical Animal Health. It has no director, per
se. And so they and the Department of Entomology
are jointly using the facilities at Falcon And
they're using the arthropod tissue culture lab
here out of microbiology, which is supporting the
salary of the persons who are now running it. And
the histopathology lab is supported by the
Department of Anatomy and partially by
microbiology. So how many people did you have on
your staff at the institute? Well... And what type
of research did you do? Our research was devoted
almost entirely to the control of anaplasmosis
and babesiosis, which are two diseases of cattle,
one of which is present in the state of Texas, and
the other one is Texas fever, which at one time was a
scourge of the South, and it's present in Mexico,
it's present in all the Caribbean countries, and
also in Central and South America, and poses a real
threat I think, of the bovine industries of this
state. We were trying to develop vaccines against
these two. So our research was oriented entirely
towards those two diseases because the Institute
does not have a biologically secure area in which
we can study viral diseases, for example. We don't
have a never did have a biologically secure wing
that was permitted to expand the scope of her
research. But in this resignation, there was an
implicit understanding that I would join this
department full-time and assume teaching
responsibilities that I had not heretofore had
had because of the administrative functions of
the director.
So I'm now teaching three courses in this
department. And that's where it's at. Well, tell
me about, let's get back to the Institute for a
minute. How many staff members did you have? How
big of an operation was this? All right, it was a
very big operation. During the time that it
existed, it brought to this campus over four and a
half million dollars.
We had an associate director for research and an
associate director for international
activities whose function it was to seek out
sources of money and to write proposals and
compete with other agencies who were after the
federal dollar. Uh, so to answer your question, at
one time we had about uh, about seven or eight
veterinarians. Oh yeah. Who were part-time here
and part-time at the Institute? There were, no,
all of these people, except for two, well three,
including me, were on campus and supported by
these federal monies. And as a matter of fact, we
paid the salaries of the people that served for the
Institute in Columbia, South America. There we
had four veterinarians. And then we were
awarded a contract to work in Africa. And the
people that we deployed out of the Institute was a
veterinarian, a girl who finished in the class of
76. And with these federal funds, we were paying
these people. That contract alone was over a
million and a half dollars. As a matter of fact,
that contract is still going on in Mali. That's in
Mali? In Mali. And it was the Institute of Tropical
Veterinary Medicine in conjunction with the
Entomology Department who jointly were supposed
to help Mali seek out ways to eradicate the setzi
fly and trypanosomiasis. Trypanosomiasis being
the most important African disease from a
standpoint of the number of cattle that it kills
and
from an economic standpoint it is it continues to
be the number one problem in Africa. Now that
contract is still operating, and the people that
originally were hired continue to be paid out of
the federal monies. My salary now is paid by the
Department of Pathology. I have nothing to do
anymore with the Institute of Tropical Veteran
Medicine, which in the first place does not exist
anymore. And number two, with the foreign animal
disease programs, I have had to leave that on the
back burner. Well, what about the research in the
institute and at this university? Is it much more
international in flavor, do you think, over the
past years, or has it changed in any way since the
50s when you were here, then when you came back?
Well, uh,
this is only my opinion. Sure, fine. I think that
the If any criticism were directed against this
College of Animal Medicine for any reason, it
would have to be in the area of research. I believe
that we have some very competent researchers
here, but there's just a very few of them that are in
research. And I think that our research
capabilities could be greatly expanded if the
people of this college of veterinary medicine
were permitted to and encouraged to develop and
participate in programs of disease research that
were not necessarily perfectly
aligned with diseases that occurred.